Our collaborative network includes a number of groups responding to this RFA. This group of investigators came together around a set of responses to the RFA that were shared openly on GitHub as they were written. Selected interactions between groups center on topics such as:

* _Deep learning_ methods are expected to be relevant to many proposals. For example, Arjun Raj proposes to apply these methods to analyze images of single cells. We recently completed a large GitHub-authored collaborative review to identify deep learning strategies that address biological problems. We look forward to discussing techniques with Arjun's group and others as they apply these methods.
* _Augmented training_ is a technique used to analyze image data with deep learning. During training, arbitrary patches are selected and arbitrary rotations are applied to training data to avoid learning irrelevant patterns. We propose an innovative equivalent for single cell expression data by sampling reads. This requires fast expression quantification. We plan to work with Rob Patro, an expert in fast gene expression quantification, to implement data augmentation by very rapidly sampling single cell observations.
* _Benchmark data_ need to be diverse and different data will be important for different evaluations. We will contribute a large compendium of harmonized bulk gene expression data from multiple rheumatic diseases. This, combined with HCA single cell assays, will help us to evaluate the extent to which bulk public data measuring disease states can be explained by HCA-identified cell types. Our analysis of latent spaces benefits from datasets that measure parallel perturbations across multiple cell types, like those proposed by Arjun Raj. Such data from the Raj lab and other groups will be needed to effectively evaluate unsupervised deep learning methods for single cell data.
* _Model interpretation_ is a key factor for any unsupervised approach. Elana Fertig and Loyal Goff's applications describe methods for the interpretation of unsupervised models. We are excited to collaborate on methods and infrastructure for model interpretation. Members of the Fertig lab have requested features in other software that we have developed, which are now implemented. We look forward to continued interactions as a collaborative network.
* _Interactive servers_ can empower bench scientists to direct the analysis of single-cell genomics data. Lana Garmire's group developed Granatum, an interactive graphic interface for single cell analysis and is responding to this analyses. We will provide source code for generating VAEs that can be incorporated into Granatum and Granatum-like systems.
* _Reproducible workflows_ will be needed to consistently evaluate methods. For example, Rob Patro's group has previously extended our example configurations to provide a workflow for Salmon. We are happy to work with any participating groups and CZI software developers to provide and configure continuous integration servers for scientific workflows. We have not budgeted this in our application as a centrally provided service makes sense; however, we can modify our budget to cover this if requested.

If you are writing a proposal that you feel is relevant to ours, please file a pull request to add a mention or let me know in some way.
